# BEHAVIOR ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL MARKETS USING MARKOV MODELS, GENETIC ALGORITHMS, AND NEURAL NETWORKS
### Logan Kelsch - Summer 2025 Research, Salisbury University

## Abstract: 
This research aims to identify anomalies indicative of underlying behavior within financial markets through a unique integration of several AI techniques. The methodology includes robust data collection, extensive variable construction (feature engineering), dimensionality reduction, normalization methods, and the use of a Genetic Algorithm (GA) applied to Markov Models (MM) and Neural Networks (NN). The anticipated outcomes will be a collection of critical insights into predictable behaviors or state-action representations in financial markets.

## Introduction:
Financial markets exhibit complex and often unpredictable behavior. With the newest era of Artificial and Computational Intelligence, recognizing and quantifying market behavior stands as one of the most unique challenges with one of the most recognized rewards. This research proposes a systematic exploration of data using machine learning \& searching methods and statistical modeling techniques programmed in Python. The project will focus on developing an automated flexible search through the feature-space of collected data for areas that can converge to form truly predictive models. Specifically, the research will address the following key questions:

- What data collection and feature engineering strategies maximize the informational richness relevant to market anomalies
- How can Markov Models and neural networks effectively represent underlying market states and actions?
- In what manner can genetic algorithms refine these models to identify and exploit predictable anomalies?

## Predicted Results:

After gathering a collection of various model types with custom parameters and exogenous sources, we can expect to have gained several insights:

- Identification of Discernible Behavior & Robust Anomalies
  - We expect to decrypt a concise set of market behaviors in one way or another by models generated by the Genetic Algorithm. This could show itself as consistent state dynamics, differentiation of predictable and non-predictable market environments, or much more complex data interpretations.

- Model Type Effectiveness
  - Comparative analysis using the Genetic Algorithm will reveal which families of models (MDP vs.\ NN) perform best overall, as well as uncover the differences in performance across different areas in the target-space.

- Optimal Model Parameters  
  - The Genetic algorithm results will converge on preferred parameter settings—such as optimal state counts, network depths, and decay rates—demonstrating efficient evolutionary searches that balance complexity and predictive performance.

## Expected Completion:
August 2025 <br>
Will develop universal data interpretation functionality throughout late 2025 and into 2026.
